# Exercise 10 — Basic Wireframe

## Instructions

Find an app that you like and think is well designed. In Adobe Xd, recreate the home screen as well as two (2) other pages as a basic, grey box wireframe. Then, apply appropriate interactivity so that you can preview the wireframe and navigate between pages correctly.

You do not need to include any colour, images, or icons. You can simply represent them with basic shapes. For text, in areas with large blocks of text, you can use basic lorem ipsum placeholder text. However, in any area where you need to click or interact, please use appropriate, descriptive text so that users can understand what is happening in your wireframe. For example: in your navigation, use correct text so the user knows where the navigation leads.

Once your wireframe is completed, create a shared link for review. Create a `review-link.txt` file and paste the link in there so that I can review the online version.

## File Structure

Submit your compressed lName-fName-section#-basic-wireframe folder to Brightspace. Your folder should contain the following:

- lName-fName-section#-basic-wireframe.xd
- review-link.txt

## Grading

| Category          | Weight |
| ----------------- | ------ |
| Banner Design     | 1      |
| Animation         | 1      |
| Transition        | 1      |
| Code Quality      | 1      |
| File Organization | 1      |
| **Total**         | **5**  |

## Submission

::: warning Due Date

Section 300: Tuesday, December 7, 2021 @ 7pm

Section 310: Wednesday, December 8, 2021 @ 7pm

Submit on Brightspace under Assignments > Exercise 10 — Basic Wireframe
:::
